---
layout: post
title: Leostick Adventures
---

I've had one of these
[Freetronics Leostick](http://www.freetronics.com.au/products/leostick)
devices sitting in the drawer ever since Jon Oxer included them in the
conference bag at linux.conf.au (2014?).  My son is taking his first
steps into programming (flashing out his name in morse code, etc), and
the small form factor and included piezo buzzer on the Leostick
sounded worth trying.

It turns out that the original Leosticks had "v1" of the arduino
bootloader and the latest arduino GUI dev environment thing needs
"v2".  The official docs are
[on the freetronics site](http://www.freetronics.com.au/pages/updating-the-leostick-bootloader),
but for those of you that dislike using the GUI and mucking about with
unnecessarily long instructions, here's the short version:

Solder on the 6 pin ICSP header that was helpfully included in the
Leostick packaging.  The pin layout is as given in the top-left of the
[schematic](https://github.com/freetronics/LeoStick/blob/master/LeoStick.pdf?raw=true),
when viewed from the top.  I used a Buspirate as my external programmer,
freetronics also has instructions for using another arduino instead.
You'll need to vary the `avrdude` command below appropriately.

{% highlight sh %}
wget https://github.com/freetronics/LeoStickBoardProfile/archive/master.zip
unzip master.zip
# Vary -c and -P depending on your external programmer of choice
avrdude -patmega32u4 -cbuspirate -P/dev/ttyUSB0 -Uflash:w:LeoStickBoardProfile-master/bootloaders/caterina/Caterina-LeoStick.hex:i -Ulock:w:0x2F:m
{% endhighlight %}

The flash upload took about a minute for me.  Congratulations you now
have a Leostick with V2 bootloader (the red light should "breathe"
more quickly now on reset).

Your new Leostick appears as `/dev/ttyACM?` instead.  For me, this
device appeared briefly whenever I reset the Leostick (lots of
evidence in `dmesg`), and then disappeared after a few seconds.
Apparently being `/dev/ttyACM?` is enough to make ModemManager get all
excited and start to send it AT commands, which then causes the
Leostick to give up.  The fix is to add something like this to udev:

{% highlight sh %}
# /etc/udev/rules.d/99-local.rules
ACTION=="add|change", SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ENV{DEVTYPE}=="usb_device", ATTRS{idVendor}=="26ba", ATTRS{idProduct}=="0002", ENV{ID_MM_DEVICE_IGNORE}="1"
{% endhighlight %}

Run `udevadm control --reload-rules` after modifying udev rules.  Now
I get `/dev/ttyACM0` appearing for about 2 seconds (`26ba/0002` I
assume the bootloader?), followed by `/dev/ttyACM1` (`26ba/8002`)
hanging around and ready to have arduino code uploaded to it.  Oh and
my user ID is already in the `dialout` group, you might want some
other USB permissions setup (in your udev rules).

If you want to run the tone generator example, the buzzer on the
Leostick is pin *11*, so you need to s/8/11/ in a few places from the
stock arduino example.
